---
layout: post
category: advanced-calculus
title: Lecture 7
---

h3. Continuum Hypothesis

Is there a set $A$ that ${\small\#}\mathbb{N} < {\small\#}A < {\small\#}\mathbb{R}$?

Consider "Cantor set":http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Cantor_set:

_Property._ Cantor set is measure zero.  \[\begin{array}{cl}
  & \frac{1}{3} + 2\cdot\frac{1}{3^2} + 4\cdot\frac{1}{3^3} + \cdots \\
= & \frac{1}{3}\left[ 1 + \frac{2}{3} + \left(\frac{2}{3}\right)^2 + \cdots \right] \\
= & \frac{1}{3}\cdot\frac{1}{1-\frac{2}{3}} \\
= & 1 \\
\end{array}\]  So $m(\text{Cantor set}) = 0.$

_Property._ $[0, 1]$ is uncountable.

Idea: Use Nested Interval Theorem.  Suppose $[0, 1]$ is countable.  Let $\{ x_n \} = [0, 1]$ and split it into three sub-intervals: $[0, \frac{1}{3}],$ $[\frac{1}{3}, \frac{2}{3}],$ and $[\frac{2}{3}, 1].$  Then $x_1$ must not belong to one of the sub-intervals, call it $I_1.$  Split $I_1$ into three sub-intervals.  Then $x_2$ must not belong to one of the sub-intervals, call it $I_2.$  Continue this process and we will have $I_1 \supset I_2 \supset \cdots,$ and $|I_n| = \frac{1}{3^n} \to 0.$  By Nested Interval Theorem, there is a real number $x \in [0, 1]$ such that $\bigcup_{n=1}^\infty I_n = \{ x \}.$  However, for all $n,$ we have $x \in I_n$ and so $x \neq x_n.$  Thus, $[0, 1] \neq \{ x_n \},$ which contradicts to our assumption above.

_Property._ Cantor set is uncountable; actually, Cantor set can be mapped 1-1 and onto to $[0, 1].$

Idea: Use Ternary representation.  Cantor set recursively breaks a closed interval into three parts; we may use $0$ for the left sub-interval, and $2$ for the right sub-interval.  Then for all $x$ of Cantor set, the ternary representation of $x$ is $0.\beta_1\beta_2\beta_3\dots$ where $\beta_i$ is $0$ or $2.$  We can easily map every $x$ to an unique $y \in [0, 1].$  The binary representation of $y$ is $0.\alpha_1\alpha_2\alpha_3\dots$ where $\alpha_i$ is $0$ or $1.$  The mapping from Cantor set to $[0, 1]$ is: If $\beta_i = 0,$ then $\alpha_i = 0,$ and if $\beta_i = 1,$ then $\alpha_i = 1.$

So Cantor set is measure zero, but its cardinality is the same with $\mathbb{R}.$  We had dug out so many numbers, but it was still not enough.

From the discrete "infinite" $\mathbb{N}$ to the continuous "infinite" $\mathbb{R},$ is there a sequence of transitional "infinites" in between?  If we loosen up ourselves and view continuous as completeness, the question can be rephrased as: Is there a transition from incompleteness to completeness?

Kurt Gödel showed that Continuum Hypothesis cannot be disproved from the set theory axioms (Gödel (1940)).  Paul Cohen showed that it cannot be proved from the set theory axioms either (Cohen (1963) & Cohen (1964)).

There are sets "bigger" than $\mathbb{R}.$

_Property._ Let $S = \{ f\:|\:f: [0, 1] \mapsto \mathbb{R} \}.$  Then ${\small\#}S > {\small\#}[0, 1].$

_Proof._
Suppose ${\small\#}S = {\small\#}[0, 1].$  There is a 1-1, onto function $\phi(t) = f_t$ for all $t \in [0, 1].$  Let $g(x) = \Big(\phi(x)\Big)(x) + 1 = f_x(x) + 1.$  Since $g \in S,$ let $a \in [0, 1]$ denote $\phi(a) = g.$  Then $g(a) - 1 = \Big(\phi(a)\Big)(a) - 1 = g(a)$ constitutes a contradiction.

Power sets are bigger: ${\small\#}X \lneqq {\small\#}2^X.$
