---
layout: post
category: advanced-calculus
title: Lecture 8
---

h3. Axioms of Set Theory

Reference: Halmos, "Naive Set Theory":http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Naive_Set_Theory_(book).

<notextile>
<p>Undefined terms:
<ul class="compact">
<li>Set</li>
<li>Element</li>
<li>Belong</li>
</ul>
</p>
</notextile>

- _Axiom of Extension._ := $A = B$ if they have the same elements.
- _Axiom of Specification._ := For every set $A$ and conditions $S(x),$ $\exists B$ such that elements of $B$ are those of $A$ for which $S(x)$ holds.
- _Axiom of Power._ := For every set $A,$ the power set $2^A$ exists.
- _Axiom of Pairing._ := $\exists C = \{ A, B \}$ for every $A, B.$
- _Axiom of Union._ := Given sets $A_\lambda$ where $\lambda \in \Lambda, \exists S$ such that $x \in S \Leftrightarrow x \in A_\lambda\:\text{for some}\:\lambda \in \Lambda.$
- _Axiom of Choice._ := Given $A_\lambda \ne \emptyset$ where $\lambda \in \Lambda,$ $\exists A = \prod_{\lambda\in\Lambda} A_\lambda \ne \emptyset.$

<notextile>
<p>Remark:
<ul class="compact">
<li>Axiom of Extension defines the equality relation among sets.</li>
<li>Axiom of Specification through Axiom of Choice guarantee that set operations are well-defined.</li>
</ul>
</p>
</notextile>

_Example._ Does this set exist: $\{ f\:|\:f: [0, 1] \mapsto \mathbb{R} \}$?
Yes.  We may construct it by Axiom of Choice.  Let $\Lambda = [0, 1]$ and $A_\lambda = \mathbb{R}.$  Then <notextile>$\prod_{\lambda\in\Lambda} A_\lambda = \{ (a_\lambda)_{\lambda\in\Lambda} \:|\: a_\lambda \in A_\lambda \}$</notextile> is the set of all functions defined on $[0, 1].$

Here is a logical question though: Is there a _Universal Set_?

Russell: No.

_Proof._ (Russell's paradox.)
Suppose there is a Universal Set $U.$  Let $A = \{ x \in U \:|\: x \notin x \}.$  Set $A$ exists due to Axiom of Specification.  Then $A \in A \Leftrightarrow A \notin A.$
