---
layout: post
category: advanced-calculus
title: Lecture 23
---

h3. Compactness

Compactness is ubiquitous in mathematics, probably except only algebra, because it is very useful and can be defined on topology space.

_Definition._ $A$ is _compact_ if every open covering of $A$ reduces to a finite subcovering.

Heine-Borel: $[a, b]$ is compact.

Note: Metric space is not complete; so Heine-Borel's argument does not apply.

_Theorem._ If $A$ is compact, then $A$ is bounded and closed.

_Proof._

Bounded: $\mathcal{F} = \{ (x-1, x+1)\:|\:x \in A \}$ is an open covering of $A.$ Since $A$ is compact, $\exists x_1, \dotsc, x_n$ such that $\cup_{k=1}^n (x_k-1, x_k+1) \supset A.$ Let $\underline{x} = \min x_k, \overline{x} = \max x_k.$ Then $[\underline{x} - 1, \overline{x} + 1] \supset A.$ So $A$ is bounded.

Closed: $\forall y \in \overline{A},$ let $\mathcal{F}_y = \{ I_{\delta/2}(x)\:|\: x \in A, \delta = |x-y| \}.$ Then $\mathcal{F}_y$ is an open covering of $A.$ $\exists x_1, \dotsc, x_n$ such that $\cup_{k=1}^n I_{\delta_k/2}(x_k) \supset A.$ Consider $\underline{\delta} = \min \delta_k,$ then $I_{\underline{\delta}/2}(y) \cap I_{\delta_k/2}(x_k) = \emptyset$ for all $k.$ So $I_{\underline{\delta}/2}(y) \cap A = \emptyset,$ that is, $I_{\underline{\delta}/2}(y) \subset \overline{A}.$ Because $\overline{A}$ is open, $A$ is closed.

Summary:
* Compact $\Rightarrow$ bounded and close: This direction of proof only needs metric space topology and does not need completeness; thus more generic.
* Bounded and close $\Rightarrow$ compact: This direction needs completeness (Heine-Borel's argument).
* In other words, compactness is a more generic concept.
