---
layout: post
category: advanced-calculus
title: Lecture 15
---

h3. Recap and Fundamental Theorem of Calculus

h4. A. Basic Arithmetics

* $0, 1, + \rightarrow \mathbb{N}.$
* $+ \rightarrow \times.$
* $+, \times \rightarrow -, \div.$
* $\rightarrow \mathbb{Z}.$
* $\rightarrow \mathbb{Q}.$

h4. B. Real Numbers

* Construct $\mathbb{R}.$
* Completeness of $\mathbb{R}.$
* $\rightarrow$ *B1.* Nested Interval Theorem.
* $\rightarrow$ *B2.* Bolzano-Weierstrass Theorem.

h4. C. Continuous Functions

* *C0.* If $f$ is continuous at $a$ and $f(a) > 0,$ then $\exists \delta > 0$ s.t. $f(x) > 0$ for all $x \in (a - \delta, a + \delta).$

_Proof._
Pick $\epsilon = \frac{1}{2}f(a)$ and there is a corresponding $\delta > 0$ such that $|f(x) - f(a)| < \epsilon$ whenever $|x - a| < \delta.$  Then $0 < \frac{1}{2}f(a) = f(a) - \epsilon < f(x) < f(a) + \epsilon.$  So $f(x) > 0$ when $x \in (a - \delta, a + \delta).$

* *C1.* "Mid-Value" Theorem.
If $f$ is continuous on $[a, b]$ and $f(a)f(b) < 0,$ then <notextile>$\exists c \in (a, b)$ s.t. $f(c) = 0.$</notextile>

* *C2.* Extreme Value Theorem.
$\exists \overline{x}, \underline{x} \in [a, b]$ s.t. $f(\underline{x}) \leq f(x) \leq f(\overline{x}).$

h4. D. Mean Value Theorem

* *D0.* Rolle's Theorem.

* *D1.* Mean Value Theorem.
If $f$ is continuous in $[a, b]$ and differentiable in $(a, b),$ then $\exists c \in (a, b)$ such that <notextile>$\frac{f(b) - f(a)}{b - a} = f'(c) = m_{AB}.$</notextile>

* *D2.* Mean Value Theorem for Integration.
If $f$ is continuous in $[a, b]$ (note: thus $\int_a^b f(x)\,\mathrm{d}x$ exists), then $\exists c \in (a, b)$ such that <notextile>$f(c)(b-a) = \int_a^b f(x)\,\mathrm{d}x.$</notextile>

h4. E. Fundamental Theorem of Calculus

* *E1.* If $f$ is continuous in $[a, b]$ and <notextile>$F(x) = \int_a^x f(t)\,\mathrm{d}t,$</notextile> then $F'(x) = f(x).$

* *E2.* If $f$ is continuous in $[a, b]$ and $F'(x) = f(x)$ for all $x \in [a, b],$ then <notextile>$\int_a^b f(x)\,\mathrm{d}x = F(b) - F(a).$</notextile>

_Proof._ *E1.*
<notextile>\[\begin{array}{rcl}F'(x) & = & \lim_{h \to 0} \frac{F(x+h) - F(x)}{h} \\ & = & \lim_{h \to 0} \frac{1}{h} \int_x^{x+h} f(t)\,\mathrm{d}t.\\ \end{array}\]</notextile>  And by Mean Value Theorem for Integration, \[\exists \xi \in (x, x + h)\:\text{s.t.}\:f(\xi)h = \int_x^{x+h} f(t)\,\mathrm{d}t.\]  Since $\xi \to x$ when $h \to 0,$ $F'(x) = \lim_{\xi \to x} f(\xi) = f(x).$

_Lemma._ If $\varphi'(x) = 0$ for all $x \in (a, b),$ then $\varphi(x) = \text{constant}$ in $(a, b).$

_Proof._ $\varphi(y) - \varphi(x) = \varphi'(z)(y - x) = 0, z \in (x, y).$

_Proof._ *E2.*
Let <notextile>$G(x) = \int_a^x f(t)\,\mathrm{d}t.$</notextile>
Then $G'(x) = f(x) = F'(x),$ i.e., $G'(x) - F'(x) = 0.$
So $G - F \equiv\:\text{constant}\:= k,$ i.e., $F(x) = G(x) - k.$
Then <notextile>$F(b) - F(a) = G(b) - G(a) = \int_a^b f(t)\,\mathrm{d}t$</notextile> where $G(a) = 0.$
