---
layout: post
category: advanced-calculus
title: Lecture 11
---

h3. Topology of $\mathbb{R}$

Topology is about neighbors; i.e., does an operation preserve the neighborhood?  Because a total ordering in $\mathbb{R}$ is established, there is the notion of _neighbors._

_Definition._
We call $(a, b) = \{ x\:|\:a < x < b \}$ an open interval.  Given $A \subset \mathbb{R},$ $A$ is an _open set_ if $\forall x \in A, \exists (a, b)\:\text{s.t.}\:x \in (a, b) \subset A.$

Note: Open interval is the basis of the openness of sets.

_Definition._
Given $A \subset \mathbb{R}$ and $x \in A,$ any open set $V$ such that $x \in V \subset A$ is a _neighborhood_ of $x$ in $A.$

_Definition._
Given $A \subset \mathbb{R},$ $A$ is _closed_ if $\bar{A}$ is open.

_Example._ $A = \{ \frac{1}{n}\:|\:n \in \mathbb{N} \}$ is neither open nor closed.
$\bar{A} = (-\infty, 0] \cup \left(\bigcup_{n=1}^\infty (\frac{1}{n+1}, \frac{1}{n}) \right) \cup (1, \infty).$
$0 \in \bar{A}$ but $\nexists (a, b)$ s.t. $x \in (a, b) \subset \bar{A}.$

_Example._ But $0 \cup A$ is closed.

_Example._ Cantor Set is closed.

_Property._ Union of open sets is open.

_Proof._ (Omitted)

_Property._ Finite intersection of open sets is open.

_Proof._
$A = \bigcap_{i=1}^n J_i,$ where $J_i$ is open.
$x \in A \Rightarrow x \in J_i\:\text{for all}\:i \Rightarrow \exists (a_i, b_i)\:\text{s.t.}\:x\in(a_i, b_i)\subset J_i\:\text{for all}\:i.$
Let $a = \max\{a_i\},$ and $b = \min\{b_i\}.$
Then $x \in (a, b) \subseteq (a_i, b_i) \subset J_i$ for all $i.$

Remark: Any intersection of open sets is not necessarily open; e.g., $\bigcap_{n=1}^\infty (\frac{-1}{n}, \frac{1}{n}) = \{ 0 \}$ is not open.

_Property._ Intersection of closed sets is closed.

_Property._ Finite union of closed sets is closed.
