---
layout: post
category: advanced-calculus
title: Lecture 29
---

h3. Examples of Metric Spaces and Norm Spaces

* Easy: Compact $\Rightarrow$ sequentially compact
* Hard: Compact $\Leftarrow$ sequentially compact

_Example._ Metrics.
* $d(x, y) = \left(\sum_{i=1}^n(x_i - y_i)^2\right)^{1/2} = \|x-y\|_2.$
* Minkowski metric: $d(x, y) = \left(\sum_{i=1}^n|x_i - y_i|^p\right)^{1/p} = \|x-y\|_p$ where $p \ge 1.$
* <notextile>$\|x-y\|_\infty = \lim_{p\to\infty} \|x-y\|_p = \max_i |x_i-y_i|.$</notextile>

_Example._ $\mathbb{X} = \{ (x, y, z)\:|\: z^2 = x^2 + y^2 - 1 \}$ and $d(x, y) =$ Geodesics.

_Example._ Discrete metric: $d(x, y) = 0$ if $x = y$ and $d(x, y) = 1$ otherwise.

_Example._ Hilbert space: $l_2 = \{(x_1,x_2,\dots)\:|\: x_n\in\mathbb{R}, \sum_{n=1}^\infty x_n < \infty \}.$
$l_2$ is a vector space that every Cauchy sequence converges with respect to $\|\cdot\|_2.$

_Example._ Banach space: $C[0, 1] = \{f\:|\: f\ \text{is continuous real-valued function defined on}\ [0, 1]\}.$
$\sup$ norm: <notextile>$\|f\|_\infty = \max_{a \le x \le b} |f(x)|.$</notextile>
We cannot define inner product in $\left(C[0, 1], \|\cdot\|_\infty\right),$ but every Cauchy sequence converges.

Remark:
* Completeness needs (at least) metric.
* Hilbert space $\Rightarrow$ Banach space, and $\Leftarrow$ is true if parallelogram identity holds: $\|u+v\|^2 + \|u-v\|^2 = 2(\|u\|^2 + \|v\|^2).$ Then inner product associates with $\|\cdot\|$ is given by polarization identity: $u \cdot v = \frac{1}{4}(\|u+v\|^2 - \|u-v\|^2).$ Or $\frac{1}{4}(\|u+v\|^2 - \|u-v\|^2 + i (\|u+iv\|^2 - \|u-iv\|^2))$ for complex Banach space.
* Compact $\Rightarrow$ complete (generalization of Heine-Borel Theorem). For $\Leftarrow$ direction we needs totally bounded.
